---
title: People-watching - Ottawa ed.
subtitle: Nonsensical thoughts of a traveling insomniac
date: 2017-01-23 12:02:44
tags:
---
11:45PM I’m sitting on a washed-out cart plastered red with posters advertising for the “Best Mattress Ever”. Ironic, I should be in bed but instead I’m in a metal box chugging through tunnels beneath Toronto, bag beside me and bags under my eyes. Four strangers sit beside me, and for strangers, they have much in common: their heads turn downwards towards flashing screens and we are all passengers on the midnight subway. Eyes flit upwards as the announcer calls out the next stop. Doors open and like a game of musical chairs, one steps off and another steps on. I wonder where they’re going. A girl scribbling equations in her notebook – heading back to campus after a weekend away? A man steps on with polished oxfords and suitcase in hand – perhaps a night shift at work? A middle-aged couple hand-in-hand engaged in animated conversation – heading home from a romantic date? Do they wonder where I am going? 

5:03AM I look out through the window of the night bus I am an overnight guest of, and make a mental note that packing my winter mitts had been the right move. The barren streets I had closed my eyes to have been painted with a thick cover of snow. A quick check of my phone tells me I’ve traveled 300km and 4hrs through towns with names that sound like they were pulled right out of a fictional movie set…  Spencerville, Escott, and there goes Junetown. I feel aches in the grooves of my back and legs. I hear the buzz of silence broken occasionally by a snore. I see the tops of drooping heads silhouetted by streetlights that whiz by, and if I squint hard, I can make out sleeping faces and fitful dreams. I had expected to be a lone passenger on this midnight carriage, but every seat is occupied from front to back, left to right. What ungodly reason would one be making this absurdly long, uncomfortable journey? But then again, here I am, on the same journey… And I’m inexplicably thankful for the company of strangers.
